
“In this practical, I implemented anomaly detection using an autoencoder on the credit-card fraud dataset. First, I loaded the dataset and normalized all features using StandardScaler so the network trains properly. Since autoencoders learn how to reconstruct normal patterns, I used the transaction data (excluding labels) both as input and output for training.”

“The encoder compresses the transaction into a 16-dimensional latent vector, and the decoder reconstructs it back to the original 30 features. I trained the autoencoder using the Adam optimizer and mean squared error loss because reconstruction accuracy is important.”

“After training, I passed test data through the model and calculated reconstruction error for each transaction. Normal transactions are reconstructed well, whereas fraudulent ones produce high MSE. Using a threshold, I classified high-error samples as anomalies. Finally, I evaluated performance using confusion matri

NumPy → numerical operations

Pandas → load creditcard.csv

TensorFlow/Keras → build autoencoder

StandardScaler → normalize dataset

train_test_split → divide into train/test

confusion_matrix, classification_report → evaluate anomaly detection

Matplotlib → plot reconstruction error distribution

layers, models → build encoder and decode

Separate features and labels
X = scaler.fit_transform(dataset.drop("Class", axis=1))
y = dataset["Class"]


✔ Normal transactions = 0
✔ Fraud transactions = 1
✔ StandardScaler normalizes features so neural network trains properly.

Split into train/test


✅ C. Build Encoder (Compress High-Dim Data)
✔ Encoder compresses high-dim credit-card transaction features
✔ Learns compressed representation (“latent vector”)
✔ ReLU adds non-linearity


✅ D. Build Decoder (Reconstruct Original Input)

✔ Decoder expands latent vector back to original features
✔ Output activation = linear because input values are continuous



✅ Autoencoder = Encoder + Decoder

✔ Loss = MSE because we want accurate reconstruction
✔ Optimizer = Adam → fast, adaptive learning


✅ Train Autoencoder
✔ Autoencoder tries to reconstruct normal transactions
✔ Fraudulent transactions → poor reconstruction → higher error (MSE)
✔ Input = Output = X (unsupervised learning)


✅ Compute Reconstruction Error
✔ MSE measures how well each sample is reconstructed
✔ High MSE indicates anomaly/fraud


✔ Threshold decides if error is high enough to mark anomaly
✔ If MSE > threshold → flagged as fraud



1️⃣ What is an autoencoder?

A neural network that learns to reconstruct its input using an encoder and decoder.

2️⃣ Why use autoencoder for anomaly detection?

It learns normal patterns; anomalies reconstruct poorly and give high error.

3️⃣ What is latent representation?

A compressed low-dimensional encoding of the input features.

4️⃣ Why is MSE used as loss?

It measures how different reconstruction is from the original.

5️⃣ Why use StandardScaler?

To normalize features for stable and faster training.

✅ Practical Questions
6️⃣ Why input and output both are X?

Autoencoder is unsupervised and attempts to reconstruct the same input.

7️⃣ Why linear activation in final decoder layer?

To output continuous numeric values matching original data.

8️⃣ What happens if threshold is too low?

Many normal samples are falsely marked as anomalies.

9️⃣ What if latent dimension is too small?

Reconstruction becomes bad → more false positives.

🔟 Why choose Adam optimizer?

It converges faster and handles sparse, noisy data well.

11️⃣ Why batch_size = 32?

Good balance between memory usage and gradient stability.

12️⃣ Why split into train/test?

Train on normal patterns, test on real data to detect anomalies.

✅ Advanced Viva Questions
13️⃣ How does backpropagation work here?

It updates encoder and decoder weights to minimize reconstruction error.

14️⃣ Why is anomaly detection unsupervised?

Because labels may not be available or fraud cases are very rare.

15️⃣ What are false positives and false negatives?

FP = normal marked as fraud; FN = fraud missed — critical in banking.


